.TH ARB 1 "2026" "arb 0.0.9" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
arb \- visualize and modify Unix pipelines: pipe a stream in, arb spawns a dynamic TUI
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B arb
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIFILE\fR]
.br
.B arb
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fB\-e\fR \fISPEC\fR
.br
.B arb
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fB\-p\fR \fIPRESET\fR
.br
.B arb
\fIVERB\fR [\fIARGS\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B arb
reads a stream on standard input and renders a dynamic TUI built from a
declarative
.I .arb
spec (widgets, \fBsource\fR query pipelines, binds). With no spec it synthesizes a
full\-screen tail of stdin. With no controlling terminal reachable (piped onward /
CI) it prints the parsed spec and each source pipeline's evaluated result instead
of a TUI \[em] the correct headless behavior.
.PP
The declarative core (widgets, \fBsource\fR pipelines, \fBout { \[u2026] }\fR
reshapes, \fBspawn\fR / poll sources, form controls, and key/mouse binds) executes
on
.B fusevm
\[em] expressions lower to a fusevm chunk and run on the bytecode VM with a
three\-tier Cranelift JIT for hot chunks, the same engine as the sibling frontends
(zshrs / stryke / rubylang / awkrs).
.PP
Parsed specs are transparently cached in
.I ~/.arb/scripts.rkyv
(rkyv shard of bincode\-encoded ASTs, keyed by a hash of the source plus a schema
version); a cache hit skips lex and parse entirely.
.PP
.B arb
also drops in for
.BR fzf :
.B \-\-fzf
turns the stream into an interactive select list and prints the chosen line(s) to
stdout on Enter. Cosmetic
.B fzf
flags are tolerated so
.B arb \-\-fzf
can replace the
.B fzf
binary.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Spec source
.TP
.BR \-e ", " \-\-eval " \fISPEC\fR"
Inline spec source, e.g.
.BR "\-e 'gauge .g \-max 100; source .g { in; count }'" .
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-preset " \fINAME\fR"
Run a bundled stdlib module or user preset by name (equivalent to
.BR "import NAME" ).
.TP
.I FILE
A dashboard spec file
.RB ( .arb ).
A positional argument that is itself a pipeline containing the
.B _
stage marker
.RB ( "find / | _ | grep x" )
is run as a pipeline instead of loaded as a spec.
.SS Preset library
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-list
List available presets (bundled stdlib +
.IR ~/.arb/lib )
and exit.
.TP
.BI \-\-save \ NAME
Save a spec (the
.I FILE
argument or
.BR "\-e SRC" )
as a named user preset in
.IR ~/.arb/lib ,
then exit.
.TP
.BI \-\-install \ FILE
Install a shared
.B .arb
spec into the preset library, then exit.
.TP
.BI \-\-as \ NAME
Name to install the spec under (defaults to the file stem).
.TP
.BI \-\-uninstall \ NAME
Remove a named preset from the library, then exit.
.TP
.B \-\-installed
List only installed (user\-library) presets, then exit.
.SS Modes
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-repl
Interactive REPL \[em] author and test specs against a sample buffer. Also the
default when
.B arb
is run on an interactive terminal with no spec and nothing piped in.
.TP
.B \-\-html
Emit a static HTML dashboard from the spec to stdout, then exit.
.TP
.B \-\-check
Validate the spec (parse + build) and exit 0/1 without reading stdin.
.TP
.B \-\-test
Run the spec's in\-language
.B test { \[u2026] }
blocks headlessly (TAP output) and exit 0/1.
.TP
.B \-\-serve
Serve the spec as a live browser dashboard on
.BR 127.0.0.1 ,
polling the stream over HTTP.
.TP
.BI \-\-port \ N
Port for
.BR \-\-serve .
.B 0
picks an OS\-assigned free port, printed on start. Default
.BR 8787 .
.TP
.B \-\-lsp
Speak the Language Server Protocol over stdio (diagnostics, completion, hover) for
.B .arb
specs.
.TP
.B \-\-dap
Speak the Debug Adapter Protocol over stdio: step the stream, set regex
breakpoints, inspect the paused line / stats / controls.
.SS Introspection
Each dump resolves the spec source from the
.B FILE
argument,
.BR \-e \ SRC ,
or
.BR \-p \ NAME ,
prints the requested stage, and exits without reading stdin.
.TP
.B \-\-dump\-tokens
Print the Tcl\-flavored lexer token stream, one
.I offset\[u2192]Tok
per line.
.TP
.B \-\-dump\-ast
Print the parsed command\-tree AST for the spec.
.TP
.B \-\-dump\-bytecode
Print the built spec's compiled query pipelines \[em] the
.B out { \[u2026] }
pipeline and each widget's
.B source
pipeline as their op vectors.
.TP
.B \-\-disasm
Print a flat, numbered disassembly of every compiled pipeline (the listing view of
.BR \-\-dump\-bytecode ).
.TP
.B \-\-json
With an
.B out { \[u2026] }
pipeline, emit results as JSON (array / number / object) instead of plain lines.
.SS fzf select mode
.TP
.B \-\-fzf
Interactively filter the stream and pick one line; the chosen line is printed to
stdout on Enter.
.TP
.BI \-\-run \ PIPELINE
Run a pipeline with
.B arb
as the interactive stage, e.g.
.BR "\-\-run 'find / | _ | grep foo'" .
.B arb
spawns the surrounding commands (each via
.BR "sh \-c" )
and owns their fds; the producer's stdout feeds the stream, its stderr a pane.
.TP
.BI \-\-preview \ CMD
Run
.I CMD
for the line under the cursor
.RB ( {}
is the current line, shell\-escaped) and show its output in a right pane.
.TP
.BI \-\-prompt \ STR
fzf prompt string (default
.BR "> " ).
.TP
.BI \-\-header \ STR
fzf header line shown above the list.
.TP
.B \-\-exact
Exact substring match instead of fuzzy. (Under
.BR \-\-fzf ,
.B \-e
is rewritten to this;
.BR arb 's
own
.B \-e
is
.BR \-\-eval .)
.TP
.B \-\-no\-sort
Keep input order (no score sort).
.TP
.BI \-\-query \ STR
Start with this query in the filter.
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-multi
Enable multi\-select (accepted for compat;
.B arb
always allows Tab\-marking).
.TP
.BI \-\-height \ N|N%
Render inline in
.I N
rows (or
.IR N% )
at the bottom instead of full\-screen, keeping the scrollback.
.TP
.BI \-\- \ CMD \ \[u2026]
Trailing preview command: re\-run over
.BR arb 's
current post\-filter output whenever the filter changes; its output shows in a pane,
always in sync with the filter, e.g.
.BR "find / | arb \-\- grep error" .
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Show version and exit.
.SH REGISTRY VERBS
When the first argument is a registry verb it is handled before option parsing:
.TP
.BR "install \fINAME\fR, add \fINAME\fR"
Install a spec from the registry into the preset library.
.TP
.BI "uninstall " NAME
Remove an installed registry spec.
.TP
.BI "search " QUERY
Search the local registry index (run
.B arb update
first).
.TP
.B update
Refresh the local registry index.
.TP
.BR "publish " [\fIDIR\fR]
Publish the spec in
.I DIR
(default the current directory) to the registry.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B HOME
Locates
.RI ( ~/.arb )
the preset library, script cache, and REPL config.
.TP
.B ARB_LIB
Overrides the preset library directory.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.arb/scripts.rkyv
The rkyv parsed\-spec cache shard.
.TP
.I ~/.arb/lib
User preset library
.RB ( \-\-save ", " \-\-install ", " "\-p NAME" ).
.TP
.I ~/.arb/config.toml
REPL config
.RB ( "[repl] mode" ).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful completion (or a passing
.BR \-\-check / \-\-test ).
.TP
.B 1
Error during execution, or a failing
.BR \-\-check / \-\-test .
.TP
.B 2
Invalid usage (missing required spec / argument).
.TP
.B 130
.B \-\-fzf
selection aborted (Esc / Ctrl\-C); no output.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fzf (1),
.BR jq (1)
