.\" arball(1) — comprehensive all-in-one man page for arb.
.\" Modeled after zshall(1): every section of the reference in one document.
.\" Render with:  man -l man/man1/arball.1
.\" Install:      cp man/man1/arball.1 /usr/local/share/man/man1/
.TH ARBALL 1 "2026-07-23" "arb 0.1.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
arball \- the arb comprehensive reference (invocation, spec language, architecture,
bytecode VM + Cranelift JIT, LSP, DAP, inline-Rust FFI)
.SH OVERVIEW
This is the all\-in\-one
.B arb
manual, modeled on
.BR zshall (1).
It concatenates the major sections of the arb reference into a single page so you
can grep with `/`:
.RS 2
.PP
.B 1.  INVOCATION
.RB "\(em " "flags, specs, presets, verbs, headless mode"
.br
.B 2.  SPEC LANGUAGE
.RB "\(em " "widgets, source pipelines, out reshapes, binds"
.br
.B 3.  ARCHITECTURE
.RB "\(em " "lower expressions \[->] fusevm chunk \[->] VM + JIT"
.br
.B 4.  TOOLING
.RB "\(em " "\-\-lsp, \-\-dap, inline-Rust FFI, dumps"
.br
.B 5.  DIAGNOSTICS
.RB "\(em " "error format and common messages"
.RE
.SH 1. INVOCATION
.B arb
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIFILE\fR reads a stream on standard input and renders a dynamic TUI
built from a declarative
.I .arb
spec. With no spec it synthesizes a full\-screen tail of stdin.
.B \-e \fISPEC\fR
supplies a spec inline and
.B \-p \fIPRESET\fR
selects a built\-in preset;
.B arb \fIVERB\fR
runs a named packaged dashboard. With no controlling terminal reachable (piped
onward / CI) arb prints the parsed spec and each source pipeline's evaluated result
instead of a TUI \(em the correct headless behavior. See
.BR arb (1)
for the per\-flag table.
.SH 2. SPEC LANGUAGE
The declarative core is a Tcl/Tk\-flavored spec.
.SS Widgets
Layout and display widgets are declared in the spec and bound to
.B source
pipelines that feed them data.
.SS Source pipelines
A
.B source
query pipeline is a superset of
.BR jq / xpath / css / yq :
it extracts and reshapes structured input, and an interactive megafilter/map runs
over the live passthrough so you refine the view without restarting the stream.
.B spawn
and poll sources feed a widget from a subprocess re\-run on an interval.
.SS Reshapes and binds
.B out { \[u2026] }
blocks reshape a source's result before it reaches a widget; form controls and
key/mouse binds drive interaction.
.SH 3. ARCHITECTURE
.EX
.arb spec \[->] parser \[->] expressions lower to a fusevm chunk \[->] fusevm VM + Cranelift JIT
.EE
.PP
Expressions and the
.B calc
pipeline op lower to a
.B fusevm
chunk and execute on the bytecode VM with a three\-tier Cranelift JIT. arb has no
whole\-program chunk \(em only ephemeral per\-expression chunks \(em so it reuses the
same shared engine that hosts zshrs, stryke, awkrs, elisp, and ruby without
carrying a bespoke runtime.
.SH 4. TOOLING
.SS Language server (\-\-lsp)
.B arb \-\-lsp
speaks LSP over stdio: completion and hover from the symbol corpus (the same table
that generates
.IR docs/reference.html ),
and diagnostics from the runtime's own parser. It is read\-only; no output reaches
the terminal.
.SS Debugger (\-\-dap)
.B arb \-\-dap
speaks the Debug Adapter Protocol over stdio: line breakpoints, single\-stepping,
a stack trace, and variable inspection. Output is captured and forwarded as
.B output
events so it never corrupts the protocol channel.
.SS Inline-Rust FFI
A
.B rust { pub extern "C" fn \[u2026] }
block desugars to an internal
.BR __rust_compile ,
compiles to a cached
.B cdylib
on first run (via the shared
.B fusevm
FFI runtime), and its exports become callable by name
.RB ( src/rust_ffi.rs ).
.SS Dumps
.B \-\-dump\-tokens
prints the token stream and
.B \-\-dump\-ast
the parsed AST. Because arb has no whole\-program chunk,
.B \-\-disasm
lists the compiled per\-expression op vectors. Each flag prints its artifact and
exits.
.SH 5. DIAGNOSTICS
Errors are written to standard error. The process exits non\-zero on a spec or
pipeline error and 0 on success.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR arb (1)
The focused invocation page. Source and issue tracker:
https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/arb
.SH AUTHOR
Part of the fusevm language family.
